      Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between Financial

                   Development and Income Inequality

                                   Mohamed Chakroun

                                         Sfax University, Tunisia
                              e-mail: Mohamed.chakroun@fsegs.rnu.tn

Abstract
This paper investigates the existence of nonlinearities in the relationship between financial
development and income inequality, using the Instrumental Variable Threshold Regression
(IVTR) introduced by Caner and Hansen (2004). It is shown, based on cross-sectional data of
60 developed and developing countries, that there is a significant financial development
threshold effect in the finance-inequality nexus. Particularly, our findings are consistent with
the Greenwood and Jovanovic hypothesis of an inverted U-shaped relationship between
banking sector development and inequality. However, there is no evidence for an inverted U-
shaped relationship between stock market development and inequality. Besides, our estimates
lead to inconclusive results regarding the impact of stock market development on income
distribution in low and lower-middle income countries. Our results show that under the lower
regime, the weight of the market is very light and its contribution to income distribution does
not matter, while under the higher regime market expansion leads to more inequity.
Keywords: Financial development, income inequality, IV threshold regression, panel data
JEL classifications: O16, O15, C36, C33

1. Introduction

During the recent decades, the social and economic inequalities have increased in most of the
countries. According to the OECD (2015a), the gap between rich and poor is at his highest
level since 30 years. In the 1980s, 10% of the wealthiest households in OECD had an average
income level that is seven times higher than the poorest 10% (OECD, 2011). This ratio
increased to 8:1 in the 1990s, and 9:1 in the 2000s (OECD, 2015a). In 2015, the average
disposable income of the richest 10% in OECD countries was around 9.6 times higher than that

                                                             1

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
of the poorest 10%. In some European countries the gap is less noticeable since the ratio is less
than 7 to 1 in France and Germany, but it is 18 to 1 in the United States. Income inequality even
worsened in egalitarian tradition countries, such as Sweden, where the ratio rose from 3.5 to 1
in 1985 to 6.5 to 1 in 2013. On the other side, income inequality has significantly narrowed in
several emerging and developing countries, but the gap between rich and poor remains striking.
In Chile and Mexico, the richest 10% of the population earn 25 times the income of the poorest
10%. (OECD, 2015a).

The increase of these inequalities is not only a social or ethical problem, but also, both, a cause
and a consequence of economic difficulties. The redistribution policies proved to be insufficient
to reduce income inequality. That is, the deficit reduction initiated by governments has led to
significant cuts in transfer programs and public services which reduced the redistribution
capacity of states and promoted the income gaps growth.

The recent financial crisis, which is mainly the result of financial development, has contributed
to the amplification of the phenomenon. The long-run dynamics of rising inequality may itself
be the cause of this crisis (Berg and Ostry, 2011). Actually, the global financial crisis has raised
deep questions about the role of finance and pushed back the question on the relationship
between finance and income inequality,

For economists the challenge would be to provide policymakers with a clear and understandable
framework that explains the ways and channels through which financial development may
reduce income inequalities. Unfortunately, the existing literature shows conflicting evidence.
We believe these mitigated findings are mainly explained by the gap existing between theory
and empirical investigations that have addressed the finance-inequality nexus.

In this paper, we argue that, basically, the relationship between financial development and
income inequality is nonlinear and subject to threshold effects. Standard regression models

                                                             2

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
assuming a linear relationship between the two variables may have led to biased and misleading
results. Therefore, we choose to apply the threshold model proposed by Caner and Hansen
(2004) to test the presence of these threshold effects, using cross sectional data for 60 developed
and developing countries. Our main assumption is that the distributional effect of financial
development depends on the degree of development of the financial system itself.

By using a panel threshold model, the present study contributes to the existing literature in four
ways. First, this model has the advantage to detect the potential nonlinearity surrounding the
relationship between financial development and income inequality. Secondly, by using the
Caner and Hansen (2004) IV threshold regression technique, we overcome the potential
endogeneity problem via a set of instrumental variables. Third, the panel threshold regression
is suitable to deal with the cross-section heterogeneity problem1. Finally, this model is a step
towards filling the gap in the literature between theory and empirical investigations about the
finance/inequality nexus, by combining the two main hypotheses, i.e. the "inequality-widening
hypothesis" and the "inequality-narrowing hypothesis".

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the relevant
literature, emphasizing nonlinearities in the finance-inequality nexus. Section 3 describes the
threshold model to be estimated. Section 4 discusses the data-related issues. Section 5 presents
the main empirical findings, while section 6 concludes.

2. Literature review

There is a widespread idea supporting that financial development reduces inequality. Recent
developments show that in the presence of investment indivisibilities and increasing returns to
scale, the financial imperfections resulting from information asymmetries and transaction costs

1 Pesaran and Smith (1995) and Hsiao (2003) have already indicated that ignorance of this issue causes biases to
appear.

                                                             3

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
produce credit constraints that are particularly harmful for small businesses and poor people
lacking collateral and connections. By reducing financial frictions and by allowing the poorest
people and businesses to access and obtain external financing, financial development can
improve the allocation of capital and reduce income inequality (Galor and Zeira, 1993; Aghion
and Bolton, 1997; Galor and Moav, 2004).

Galor and Zeira (1993) believe that an economy with capital market imperfections and unequal
initial distribution of wealth will maintain this inequality and grow more slowly than a similar
economy with more equitable initial distribution of wealth. Similar predictions have been
shown by Banerjee and Newman (1993).

However, other studies argue that financial development exacerbates income inequality and
helps mainly the rich (Haber et al, 2003; Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990). Haber et al. (2003)
consider that the credit is generally channeled to connected entrepreneurs and not to those with
better opportunities and prospects. The poor mainly rely on informal family connections for
funds, so that financial depth excessively benefits the rich. Controversially, Stiglitz (2015)
argues that the financial sector, through a variety of forms of exploitation rents, has contributed
to both the inequalities at the top and the bottom in the US.

In their seminal paper, Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) studied the link between finance and
inequality in the context of an endogenous growth model. They found that the dynamics of the
development process are nonlinear and support the Kuznets hypothesis (von Bayern, Heathcote
et al. 2009). In the early stages of economic development when financial markets are virtually
nonexistent, financial development increases inequality. Then, when the economy strengthens
and an extensive financial structure develops, the distribution of income becomes more stable.
This form of inverted U-shaped curve is based on fixed costs that arise when people want to
resort to financial intermediaries.

                                                             4

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
Many empirical studies have addressed the finance-inequality question. But, the results were
mixed. Das and Mohapatra (2003) examined how the liberalization of the stock market affects
the distribution of income. They conclude that the gains from liberalization appear to be in favor
of the top quintile to the cost of middle quintiles and without effect on the lower income quintile.

Liang (2006) studied the link between finance and inequality in urban China. His main finding
was that the relationship is linear and the financial development of China contributes
significantly to reducing income inequality in urban areas. However, these positive
distributional gains from financial sector development have been severely reduced by the
increase in urban unemployment and massive layoffs caused by the radical reforms in urban
areas and by restructuring of public enterprises.

Clarke et al. (2006) studied the relationship between finance and income inequality based on a
sample of 83 developed and developing countries for the period 1960 -1995. They found that,
in the long-run, the greater is financial sector developed, the lower is inequality.

Beck et al. (2004, 2007) used a sample of 72 developed and developing countries over the 1960-
2005 period. Their results showed that financial development disproportionately boosts
incomes of the poorest quintile and reduces inequalities.

Recently, Beck et al. (2009) studied the effect of banking deregulation on income distribution
in the United States over the 1976-2006 period. They found that deregulation has significantly
enhanced income distribution. The results suggest that regulatory barriers to competition
between banks in the 20th century were disproportionately detrimental to low-income workers.
In contrast, Gimet and Segot (2011) used a Structural Vector Autoregressive Model and a
sample of 49 countries over the period between 1994 and 2002. They found that the banking
sector development tends to increase income inequality and that this relationship depends on
the characteristics of the financial sector rather than its size.

                                                             5

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
Similarly, Jauch and Watzka (2015) used an unbalanced panel of 138 developed and developing
countries for the 1960-2008 period to investigate the finance- inequality nexus. Their empirical
results reject the theoretical models predicting a negative impact of financial development on
income inequality measured by the Gini coefficient.

Another but more recent country-level study by Sehrawat and Giri (2015) examined the
financeŁinequality nexus in India between 1982 and 2012. The results show that financial
development aggravates income inequality in both the long-run and the short-run.

This result is contrasted by Chen and Kinkyo (2016). Their estimation results from a panel
error-correction model using the PMG estimator suggest that financial development reduces
inequality only in the long-run. However, estimates of country-specific coefficients exhibit
adverse short-run effects of financial development on income inequality.

More recently, Seven and Coskun (2016) using dynamic panel data methods to assess the
financeŁ inequalityŁpoverty nexus argued that although financial development promotes
economic growth, this does not necessarily benefit those on low-incomes in emerging countries.

Obviously, the results derived from the above studies are not conclusive in matters of the exact
relationship between finance and income inequalities. As argued by Altunba and Thornton
(2019), existing empirical literature examining the financial development/inequality nexus
provides inconclusive findings because most of empirical studies are based on ordinary least
squares, instrumental variables, and panel estimation techniques, which do not allow to catch
the effects of the explanatory variables on the entire conditional distribution of the dependent
variable.

As an alternative method, Altunba and Thornton (2019) propose a quantile regression
approach to examine the effect of financial development on income inequality. Their empirical
results suggest the impact of financial development on income inequality changes with a

                                                             6

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
country's income level. In particular, financial development is found to promote equality in
upper-middle income countries, whereas it accentuates inequalities in low- and high-income
countries.

Another possibly reliable explanation that can be conveyed to explain these divergent findings
is the presence of threshold effects. Ineluctably, empirical analyses that omit this feature could
lead to spurious regressions and probably misleading results.

Actually, only few empirical studies have attempted to test the presence of threshold effects in
the relationship between financial development and income inequality. For instance, Bresson
(2004) tried to capture the effects of financial development channeled through investment in
physical capital and educational capital on income inequality. His study was conducted on a
sample of 130 countries over the 1960-1999 period. The results show that the overall effect of
financial development on inequality quickly becomes positive above a threshold of a relatively
low income. Nevertheless, he found a reducing inequality through the influence of banking
sector development on the distribution of education.

Bonfiglioli (2005), using a sample of 69 countries over the 1980-2000 period, showed that a
better investor protection contributes to financial development and affects income inequality in
different ways. Indeed, any improvement over a low level of investor protection leads to an
increase of risk-taking rather than risk-sharing, which leads to an increase in income inequality.
However, when investor protection is sufficiently high, further improvement is more favorable
for risk-sharing than risk-taking and inequality is reduced.

More recently, Bacarreza and Rioja (2008) studied the effects of financial development on
income distribution in the region of Latin America and the Caribbean during the period from
1960 to 2005 using a dynamic panel estimation. Their main finding is that financial
development affects disproportionate effects on income quintile groups. Particularly, the

                                                             7

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
positive distributional effects of the financial system expansion are not captured by the poorest
quintile. The authors also noted some evidence for the Greenwood and Jovanovic hypothesis,
in such a manner that the positive effect begins only beyond a given threshold of economic
development.

On the other hand, Kim and Lin (2011), using a sample of 53 countries over the 1960-2005
period, proved the Greenwood and Jovanovic hypothesis of nonlinearity. They found that the
benefits of the banking sector and the stock market development occur only if the country
reaches a threshold level of this development. Below this critical value, financial deepening
opposes the income inequality reduction.

Tan and Law (2012) found that in the early stage of financial development, financial deepening
leads to more equitable distribution of income, but after reaching a higher level of financial
development, excessive financial deepening widens the gap between the rich and the poor.

Similarly, Kunieda et al. (2014) showed that financial development expands income inequality
under higher financial openness, whereas it reduces income inequality under lower financial
openness. This result is confirmed by Park and Shin (2017) who highlighted a U-shaped
relationship between finance and inequality. That is, financial development contributes to
reducing inequality up to a point, but as financial development proceeds further, it contributes
to greater inequality.

However, these finding are contrasted by the study conducted by Kaidi and Mensi (2016).
Based on an international sample of 138 countries over the period 1980-2012, their findings
suggest an inverted U-shaped relationship between financial development and income
inequality.

Using a sample of 23 Chinese provinces during the period 1996Ł2012, Liu and all (2016) show,
based on a panel threshold regression model, that financial deepening helps to reduce income

                                                             8

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
inequality only in the lower financial development regime. This positive relationship turns out
to be insignificant if the stock market capitalization has reached a certain threshold. A similar
result has been recently reported by Shahbaz et al (2017) who found a U-shaped relationship
between financial development and income inequality in Kazakhstan over the period 1990-
2014. That is, financial development narrows income inequality in the early stages of transition,
but beyond a given threshold it leads to an increase in income inequality.

In the same direction, Baiardi and Morana (2018) detected a "too much finance" effect during
the recent crises in the Euro area. Their empirical findings show that income inequality falls as
financial development increases up to a threshold value of 90Ł100 GDP points, and then rises
as financial deepening exceeds the threshold.

More recently, Chiu and Lee (2019) explored the non-linear relationships among income
inequality and financial development when country risk environments change, by using a panel
smooth transition regression model. Their results show the effect of financial development on
income equality is positive for high-income, whilst it is negative for low-income countries.

2. The model

We estimate a model similar to that of Beck and Levine (2004), Beck et al. (2007), Ang (2010)

and Rioja and al. (2014), where change in income inequality is regressed on financial

development and a set of control variables:

               =  + ' +                      (1)

where i = 1, 2 ...N is the country indicator and  is an error term.  denotes
changes in income inequality,  is the financial development variable and  represents a
vector of control variables including a constant term.

                                                   9

              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
To allow for nonlinearity in the relationship, we extend equation (1) into a threshold regression
model that takes the following form:

 = 1(  ) + 2 ( > ) +                                                (2)

where  =  ,  = (,  ) ,  = (, ') , j=1,2. I(.) represents an indicator
function which takes the value 1 if the argument in parenthesis is valid, and 0 otherwise.  is
an exogenous threshold variable used to split the data into different regimes or groups. The
threshold parameter is   , where a strict subset of the support of . This model allows the
regression parameters 1 and 2to switch between regimes depending on whether  is smaller
or larger than the unknown threshold value .

Equation (2) can be re-written in a more detailed form as follows:

 = 1 (  ) + 2 () + 1' (  ) + 2' () +  (3)

Assuming that all explanatory variables are exogenous, Hansen (2000) suggests equation (2) to
be estimated using Ordinary Least Square (OLS). Conditional on the above estimators, we then
can estimate the threshold value by minimizing the concentrated sum of squared errors function
(SSE).

However, the threshold estimation method proposed by Hansen (1996, 2000) is not suitable
when one or more explanatory variables are endogenous. Since we consider that financial
development is highly likely to be endogenous, we rather choose to estimate equation (2) by
applying the Caner and Hansen (2004) instrumental variable threshold regression model
(IVTR).

The authors define a reduced form of the endogenous variable as follows:

 =  (, ) +                                                          (3)

              10

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
where i is an unknown parameter vector, g is a linear function and   is a random error. The
vector  represents a set of instrumental variables which are not included in the inequality
regression, along with other exogenous variables of the model. After replacing the endogenous
variable by its reduced form, equation (3) can be written as follows:

 = 1  (, ) (  ) + 2  (, ) () + 1' (  ) +

2' () +                                    (4)

where  = 1   (  ) + 2   ( > ) + 

The parameters are estimated sequentially. First we estimate the reduced form parameter  and
obtain the predicted value  =  = g (si, ) = 'si. Second we turn to the estimation of the
threshold parameter  which is chosen to minimise the sum of squared residuals from a
sequence of regressions of inequality variable on the predicted value of financial development
variable. Third, we estimate the slope parameters (1, 2, 1, 2) by 2SLS or GMM on the split
sample implied by .

To test the existence of threshold effect, Caner and Hansen (2004) suggest the Supremum Wald
test statistic. First, we fixe    to any value and the equation (2) is estimated by GMM. Then,
for the fixed value of , the Wald statistic under H0 is constructed as follows:

() = [1() - 2()][1() + 2() ]-1[1() - 2()]                        (5)

Repeating the calculation for all   , we can obtain the Sup statistic as the greatest value of
the calculated :

  = sup ()                        (6)



                                    11

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
The asymptotic distribution of this statistic is not standard because of the presence of the
nuisance parameter . For this reason, Caner and Hansen (2004) use a bootstrapping procedure
to get the p-value.

Finally, given the estimate  of the threshold variable, the sample is split into two subsamples
(regimes) based on the indicators (  ) and () . The slope parameters are then
estimated separately on each subsample. Caner and Hansen (2004) show that the estimators are
consistent and the slope parameter estimates asymptotically normal with conventional
covariance matrices.

3. Data description and sources

The sample data used in this study is a pool of 60 developed and developing countries (25 high-
income countries, 30 middle-income countries and five low-income countries) over the 1980-
2009 period. It includes 17 countries in North America, Europe and Central Asia, 17 in Latin
America and Caribbean, 14 in South and East Asia and Pacific, 8 in Sub-Saharan Africa and 4
in Middle East and North Africa2.

All variables are averaged over the sample period. The income inequality data were obtained
from the World development Indicators (WDI). For the financial development indicators, we
use the "Financial Structure Database" compiled by Beck et al. (2009). Data sources and
definitions are detailed in Table A1 in the Annexes.

3.1 Income inequality variables

Following Beck et al. (2004, 2007) and Kim and Lin (2011), changes in income inequality are
captured through the annual growth rate of the Gini Coefficient (GINI_GR), computed as the
log difference between the last and the first observation divided by the number of years between

2 A complete list of countries is provided in table A3.1 in the Annexes.

                                                            12

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
these two observations. Nevertheless, since the Gini coefficient gives only information on the
overall income distribution, we need another measure to ensure that the change in income
inequality is associated with a change in the income of the poor. Consequently, we used the
annual growth rate of the share of the lowest Income quintile (LOWEST_GR) as an additional
income inequality measure, which is computed as the log difference between the share of the
lowest income quintile for the last and the first observations divided by the number of years
between these two observations.

3.2. Financial development variables

As advanced by Lynch (1996), a good measurement of financial development is crucial for
effective policy formulation, implementation and evaluation. We believe this argument holds
particularly true in assessing how financial development reduces poverty or income inequality.
But as pointed by Beck and al. (2007), a perfect indicator of financial development does not
exist. For this reason, we rely in this study on the most commonly used proxies for financial
development. Firstly, to proxy the banking sector development we followed Beck and Levine
(2002) and Kim and Lin (2011) using three indicators expressed in real terms. The first one is
Private Credit (PRIV) which equals the value of credit by financial intermediaries to the private
sector divided by GDP. To detect the performance of banking activities, we used the Liquidity
Ratio (LLY). It is measured as the ratio of M2 (broad money) to GDP. This ratio determines
the size of financial intermediaries without limitation to the private sector. The third indicator
is Bank Assets (DBA), measured by the ratio of domestic deposit money bank assets to GDP.
This proxy reflects the degree of saving allocation to companies by domestic banks.

As for the measurement of the stock market development, we have followed Rousseau and
Wachtel (2000), Beck and Levine (2002) and Kim and Lin (2011), by using three proxies: i)
The Stock Market Capitalization (MCAP) equals the total value of listed shares divided by

                                                            13

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
GDP. It reflects the importance of financing by issuing shares in raising capital and in the
process of resource allocation. ii) The Turnover Ratio (TOR) is equal to the value of traded
shares on domestic exchanges divided by the value of listed shares. This liquidity measure
enables detecting the efficiency of the national Stock Market. An increase in TOR implies lower
transaction costs. iii) Finally, the Value Traded (VT) is defined as the value of traded shares on
domestic exchanges divided by GDP. It indicates the volume of stock market transactions
relative to the size of the economy.
3.3. Control variables
In line with empirical literature on growth and finance, we introduce in the regression a set of
control variables in accordance with the augmented Solow model as proposed by Mankiw and
al. (1992).
The growth rate of real GDP per capita (GDP_GR) is included to capture the Kuznets
hypothesis. The average years of the secondary school attainment variable (SCHOOL) is added
to control the effect of human capital. Inflation (INFL) is introduced in the regression to account
for the macroeconomic environment. The ratio of government expenditure to GDP (GOV) is
included to account for the degree of government involvement in markets and the possible use
of redistribution expenditure. Trade openness (TRADE) is measured by the sum of exports and
imports divided by GDP. It is included in the regression to capture the degree of international
openness.
Furthermore, to alleviate the problem of simultaneity and to assess whether the initial conditions
of a country matter for future income inequality, all control variables are taken in logarithm and
in initial values.

                                                            14

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
3.4. Instrumental variables
As suggested in the literature, we include the initial values of financial development indicators
and creditor rights (Kim and Lin, 2011) and the levels of religious composition, ethnic
fractionalization and legal origins (MacCaig and Stengos, 2005; Beck et al., 2004) as
instruments in order to control for endogeneity and reverse causality.
For creditor rights (CREDITOR), the data were taken from Djankov et al. (2005). This measure
reflects the legal rights of creditors against defaulting debtors; a higher value indicates stronger
creditor rights. The legal origin proxy is a dummy variable (BRITISH) that takes 1 if the legal
system is based on British tradition and 0 otherwise. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) argue that the
origin of legal system has consequences on contractual institutions and show that investor
protection and the efficiency of the courts differ between different legal origins. Indeed,
countries whose legal sources are based on British tradition ("Common Law") offer better
protection to creditors and shareholders' than countries with a legal system based on French
tradition ("Civil Law"). As regards to the religious composition, Landes (1998) believes that
Catholic and Muslim countries are characterized by cultural intolerance that limits competition
and property rights protection. In this context, we consider two variables that reflect the part of
Catholics (CATHOLIC) and Muslims (MUSLIM) in the population since these two indicators
have strong influence on financial development. Finally, for ethnic fractionalisation (ETHNIC),
Beck et al. (2003) advanced that greater ethnic diversity implies the adoption of policies and
institutions that rely on maintaining power and control rather than the creation of an open and
competitive financial system.

                                        INSERT TABLE 1 HERE

                                                            15

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
Summary statistics for the dependent and explanatory variables are given in table 1. Besides,
as multiple regression analysis is often subject to multicollinearity problems, we constructed a
correlation matrix between financial development and inequality measures. Unsurprisingly,
Table 2 shows that variables are highly correlated. For this reason, we applied a sequential
approach in which regression analyses were conducted separately for each of the financial
development and inequality measures.

                                       INSERT TABLE 2.1 HERE

4. Results

Table A.2 reports parameters estimates of the linear GMM model. It is shown that the impact
of financial development on income inequality is insignificant regardless of the measure used
of financial development. Dollar and Kraay (2002) have already explained this result by the
fact that financial development helps the poor and the rich in the same proportions. Kim and
Lin (2011) argue that the use of a sample of countries with different levels of financial
development may obscure the different roles played by this development in reducing
inequalities. Thus, ignorance of the potential threshold effects in the relationship between
financial development and inequality may cause biases to appear leading to fallacious results.

4.1. Linearity tests

The linearity tests have been conducted by using the initial values of three banking sector
development indicators, i.e. PRIV0, LLY0 and DBA0, and three stock market development
indicators, i.e. TOR0, VT0 and MCAP0, as potential threshold variables3. Furthermore, the

3 As recommended by Caner and Hansen (2004.), the threshold variable should be exogenous. For this reason, we
only consider the initial values of the financial development variables (i.e. PRIV0, LLY0, DBA0, MCAP0, TOR0,
VT0).

                                                            16

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
WaldŁWolfowitz test has been applied to check for randomness4. Obviously, results shown in
table 2.2 indicate that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the variables are in random order
at the 5% significance level.

                                       INSERT TABLE 2.2 HERE

As discussed in section 2, to test whether there is evidence for a threshold effect in the
relationship between financial development and income inequality we employ the Sup W
statistic. The asymptotic p-values are computed by following the bootstrap procedure suggested
by Caner and Hansen (2004)5.
Estimation results reported in tables 3-6 indicate that the Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990)
hypothesis of an inverted U-shaped relationship between financial development and inequality
cannot be rejected. The results show a strong and significant threshold effect in the financial
intermediary development-inequality and stock market development-inequality nexuses.
Across alternative measures of financial development, the p-values of the Wald test show that
the threshold effects of financial variables on GINI_GR and LOWEST_GR are statistically
significant.

4.2. Financial intermediary development and income inequality

The linearity tests show that the estimated threshold varies between 25.09% and 26.43% when
the GINI_GR is used as a dependent variable (Table 3) and between 26.90 % and 40.19% for
LOWEST_GR inequality measure (Table 4). These threshold values indicate the degree of
financial intermediary development a country should achieve so that improvement in its

4 As suggested by an anonymous referee, linearity tests results would be less convincing if the 6 potential threshold
variables were roughly clustered around two modes and not uniformly distributed across the 60 countries.
5 Linearity tests have been performed and confidence intervals constructed using 10 thousands bootstraps.

                                                            17

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
financial system may lead to a reduction of income inequality. Thus, the threshold regression
splits the sample into two separate regimes: one is characterized by a developed banking system
and the other by a less developed one. As shown in tables A3.2 and A3.3, the high regime
includes 32 (21) countries among them 88% (90%) when PRIV0 is used as threshold variable
and GINI_GR (LOWEST_GR) is used as a dependent variable. When LLY0 is taken as
threshold variable, 32 countries fall into the high financial regime, among them 76% are upper-
middle and high-income countries.

One can realize, based on estimation of the threshold model, that the coefficients on financial
development are statistically significant for the two regimes. Particularly, the results presented
in Tables 3 and 4 indicate that bank development has a threshold and statistically significant
effect on both the growth of the Gini coefficient and the growth of the income share of the
poorest quintile. This result implies that during its first stages of development, financial
intermediary accentuates inequalities and disproportionately helps more the rich. The positive
distributional effects of financial development are not effective unless the banking sector has
reached a minimum critical size. In other words, in a system with less developed financial
intermediation, expansion of the banking sector raises inequalities and is detrimental to the
poor. However, in the developed banking system regime, financial development positively
affects income distribution and, more interestingly, boosts the income of the poor. Thus, a better
allocation of resources to the private sector and a relaxation of credit constraints might
contribute to reducing inequalities in countries with a developed banking system. However, it
deteriorates the income distribution in countries where the banking system is underdeveloped.
Obviously, the threshold model proves that the relation between financial development and
income inequality is nonlinear. Mitigated results from previous studies are likely due to the
misleading assumption of a linear and monotonic relationship between the two variables.

                                                            18

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
                                        INSERT TABLE 3 HERE

Tables 3 and 4 show another interesting result. In the threshold regression, initial income share
of the poor and initial Gini both enter negatively and significantly. This result suggests that
countries with initially less equitable distribution of income might experience faster reductions
in income inequality. However, these reductions are expected to be more important in those
countries with a more developed banking system, as the effect tends to be bigger in the higher
regime.
Furthermore, tables 3 and 4 provide interesting insight regarding the behavior of some control
variables. Initial schooling enters significantly in the threshold regression. The higher is the
initial secondary school enrolment rate, the faster are the reductions in income inequality and
the bigger is the share of income received by the poorest quintile. Besides, the coefficient
estimates suggest that schooling has a significant negative (positive) effect of on the Gini
growth rate (growth of the share of the poorest quintile), regardless of the level of development
of the financial system. This result confirms the tight relationship between access to education,
economic growth and poverty alleviation.
On the other hand, the relationship between initial trade openness and income inequality is not
clear. Under the developed banking system regime, international openness aggravates income
inequality and hurts the poor. Nevertheless, the negative distributional effect of international
openness is uncertain under a less developed banking system regime. When private credit is
considered as a threshold, trade openness is not found to be pro-poor. Trade openness is unlikely
to be reducing poverty when the poor do not have access to credit. We also find that the
coefficient estimates from table 4 show that high levels of inflation are correlated, positively
and significantly, with greater income inequality. This is true independently from the level of
the banking system development. The result corroborates the idea that inflation hurts the poor

                                                            19

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
by redistributing incomes to the detriment of those already living in precarious conditions and
least accessing financial instruments to hedge against price instability. In addition, the results
show that government expenditures play a significant role in reducing income inequality.
Nevertheless, it seems this role is more important under a less developed financial
intermediation regime.

                                        INSERT TABLE 4 HERE

Finally, the threshold regression results show that the initial GDP growth rate has a nonlinear
effect on income inequality, depending on the degree of financial intermediary development.
Actually, the results fail to provide any support for the Kuznets hypothesis. The final effect of
economic growth on income inequality appears to depend ultimately upon the structure of the
financial system per se. Our results suggest that countries initially growing rapidly might
experience faster reductions in income inequality. However, these reductions are expected to
be more effective in countries with a less developed banking system. In fact, large banking
sectors tend to pump excessive credit to households, inflating unsustainable bubbles, which
disproportionately benefit the rich. This result seems accurately describing what happened in
the OECD countries in the aftermath of the global financial crisis (OECD, 2015).

4.3. Stock market development and income inequality
When considering stock market development as threshold variable, results from linearity test
show again a significant threshold effect in the financial developmentŁinequality nexus.

                                        INSERT TABLE 5 HERE

                                                            20

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518099
